RFC: Monitoring across the stack (#193)
WordPress/openverse: rfcs/20220307-monitoring_across_the_stack.md

# Monitoring across the stack

Note: Because I had to spend a good deal of time sketching out how this stuff works, I wrote a good deal of preliminary code. It's probably not perfect so it's really only a starting point, but it at least gives a vision for how we could do this.

> Additionally, there are several 

Author: Not sure what I was writing there. Removed.

As the production instances of the Openverse API start getting used for Jetpack and even WordPress core integrations soon and in the near future we will likely see a tremendous increase in traffic. Without visibility into our services we will be significantly hindered when debugging production performance and stability issues.

Without measuring _current_ performance, we can't make decisions about how to improve performance that aren't couched in anything better than educated guesses. This is not a situation we want to be in long term. We also have a sense that our services are reasonably speedy at the moment, but we don't know exactly how speedy or what kind of outliers exist. Sometimes we see the API slow down to over 2 seconds per-request. How often does that happen? Is it a 99th percentile or more like 60th (i.e., closer to the average experience).

## Purpose

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Author: I'm pretty sure we only have a single RDS instance based on what I'm seeing in our terraform modules.

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Reviewer: Aside from the staging db, I see prod and upstream (Catalog). I'm not sure if there's an obvious choice between the two for storing metrics, though. Would there be any benefit to separating it from the API db?

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Reviewer 2: That's correct, there are three, one for the staging catalog, one for the prod catalog, and one for the prod api.

I don't think cost should be a deciding factor here; there are other places we can make cost optimizations if we need to.

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Author: Cool, let's make a new RDS for it then.

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Reviewer 3: > we only have a single RDS instance based on what I'm seeing in our terraform modules.

Ah, that just speaks to the reality that our terraform modules don't fully encapsulate all of our AWS resource, unfortunately :sweat: +1 to a new RDS instance for this.

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Reviewer 2: Can we update the RFC to reflect this discussion and resolve this thread, @sarayourfriend ?

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Author: I've already updated it to recommend using RDS. Was there something else that needed to be updated @zackkrida?

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Reviewer 4: @sarayourfriend In line [34][lineref] it says:

> ... It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

+1 to a new RDS instance for this!

[lineref]: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/blob/021533e5c528697e0d0bdfb8bf9c0c0942f8d8b3/rfcs/20220307-monitoring_across_the_stack.md?plain=1#L34

Prometheus is a time series database with an advanced query language and the ability to configure aggregate data transformations (for example, based on a given metric you can also tell Prometheus to calculate a running mean of the metric from over the last 5 minutes, or any other span of time). It includes anomaly detection as well as integration with many tools you can use for alerting like Slack, PagerDuty, or email. There are [official and unofficial client libraries](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/) for all the langauges we currently use or could conceivably use in the future including Python, Node.js, Go, PHP, and JVM languages.

> Grafana is a data visualization tool that supports building complex dashboards. It has the ability to integrate with nearly any source of data you could imagine, including our existing catalog and API databases. In the future we could use it to monitor cataloging progress over time for example. It's a tool good for many things in addition to visualizing metrics.

Reviewer 5: Me too! This would be a really interesting project.

The Prometheus and Grafana services encompass the following key features that are important for maintaining the health and stability of our services:

* Metrics gathering
* Dashboard creation for making it quick and easy to understand the current state of our service health
* Anomaly detection and alarming so that if things get weird, we'll know about it as soon as possible

Additionally, both are free software. Prometheus is Apache 2 licensed and Grafana is AGPL-3.0. Both are actively developed in the open with heavy community involvement. They are also both widely deployed with lots of blog posts discussing configuration, use cases, and troubleshooting.

## Self-hosted vs. hosted

> I will defer this decision to @rbadillap because he has way more knowledge about what will be affordable for us both from a raw cost perspective and from a time-spent-maintaining perspective. My gut says that in the interest of getting monitoring sooner than later we could pay for hosted Prometheus and Grafana to start with and eventually migrate to self-hosted. AWS has hosted offerrings for both. I believe we could use our existing Postgres for them as well. I'm assuming that AWS hasn't added anything that would lock us into their hosted version of these services, but I could be wrong about that.

Author: That's a good point.

I need to revise this section. Grafana by default uses SQLite (makes provisioning easy). I wonder if we can survive with just that for now.

I'd hate to spin up a second RDS instance just for monitoring, just from a cost perspective. @rbadillap do you have any thoughts here? Can we get away with using SQLite in production for Grafana or is that going to bite us eventually?

> I will defer this decision to @rbadillap because he has way more knowledge about what will be affordable for us both from a raw cost perspective and from a time-spent-maintaining perspective. My gut says that in the interest of getting monitoring sooner than later we could pay for hosted Prometheus and Grafana to start with and eventually migrate to self-hosted. AWS has hosted offerrings for both. I believe we could use our existing Postgres for them as well. I'm assuming that AWS hasn't added anything that would lock us into their hosted version of these services, but I could be wrong about that.

Reviewer 3: My gut says that we should spin up a new instance and that it wouldn't cost _too_ much (if Grafana can survive on sqlite it can certainly survive on a small postgres instance).

> I will defer this decision to @rbadillap because he has way more knowledge about what will be affordable for us both from a raw cost perspective and from a time-spent-maintaining perspective. My gut says that in the interest of getting monitoring sooner than later we could pay for hosted Prometheus and Grafana to start with and eventually migrate to self-hosted. AWS has hosted offerrings for both. I believe we could use our existing Postgres for them as well. I'm assuming that AWS hasn't added anything that would lock us into their hosted version of these services, but I could be wrong about that.

Author: Yeah if we don't care about cost as suggested by @zackkrida then just use a new instance. It will be more resilient into the future anyway.

## Relevant integrations

Here's the list of integrations we'll want to incorporate into Prometheus and Grafana.

### Prometheus data integrations

These are for pulling metrics into Prometheus from various services. This would all be in addition to writing and integration for Nuxt and deploying `django-prometheus` for the API (Airflow should be automatically covered by the exporter listed below).

* Elasticsearch exporter: https://github.com/prometheus-community/elasticsearch_exporter
* Postgres exporter: https://github.com/prometheus-community/postgres_exporter
* AWS ECS exporter: https://github.com/slok/ecs-exporter
* Cloudflare exporter: https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/cloudflare_exporter
* AWS CloudWatch exporter: https://github.com/prometheus/cloudwatch_exporter
    * This one is interesting. I think we'd define system metrics to gather in CloudWatch and then export them into Prometheus. Hopefully this wouldn't incur additional costs to what we're already doing with CloudWatch.

> * Alternative to the CloudWatch exported is to implement the Node exporter: https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter

Author: Added, thanks!

    * This has the added benefit of being portable across cloud providers vs CloudWatch being AWS services only.
    * Does not cover ECS in an obvious way; could we run the node exporter in the container? Would that produce meaningful information?
* Airflow exporter: https://github.com/epoch8/airflow-exporter

### Grafana alerting integrations

Grafana has built in alerting since v4.0. It works upstream from provider alertmanagers, so if we wanted to consume alerting rules from Prometheus we could build rules in Prometheus and then consume them in Grafana and alert on them.

[Here is the list of Grafana "contact points" for alerting.](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/contact-points/) A contact point is the notification channels that Grafana can send alerts to.

> The most relevant for our usage are probably Slack, Webhook, and Email. Optionally we could incorporate PagerDuty depending on the team's tolerance and how we decide to organize expectations around responding to alerts.

Author: My hang up with PagerDuty is that it's not free and requires additional accounts, therefore additional security practices, etc.

Feature wise I think it's also overkill for our team's requirements.

My preference is for us to primarily rely on email and in particular to use email lists to allow individuals to subscribe/unsubscribe at will from alarm streams and provide an easy historical public record of alarms. We could use something like [GNU Mailman](https://list.org/) to [host this ourselves](https://github.com/maxking/docker-mailman) using FARGATE.

Email also makes it easy to compartmentalize alarms per category, it makes it easy for individuals to subscribe to specific streams of alarms by using different email prefixes per category. For example, each service could have its own mailing list.

We can also integrate Slack for good measure and have all alarms sent to the relevant channels via Slack incoming Webhook. It's very easy to configure the Slack integration.

> The general purpose Webhook integration is useful for a future where we migrate away from Slack to Matrix (should that ever happen).

Author: I guess I could say "when that eventuality occurs" to be less cynical :sweat_smile:

2. We can place a `docker-compose.monitoring.yml` in the WordPress/openverse repository and optionally pull the file down when certain commands are run to set up monitoring for each individual piece of the stack.

The second one seems more complicated to me. For one, if you're running all three repositories locally you'd end up with three separate Prometheus and Grafana instances to manage and configure.

The first one also seems complicated but I believe it's also easier. Remember that Prometheus is the source of truth for the configuration, so we wouldn't have to spread out the knowledge about where Prometheus lives in all our services. As long as our services are configured to serve Prometheus the appropriate data on consistent HTTP endpoints, then any Prometheus instance anywhere can consume them. That does mean that some configuration will be spread in the other direction: that is, rather than storing information about Prometheus in each service, each service's information will be stored in Prometheus. This seems like an appropriate compromise.

> I'm not sure where the best place to put the monitoring docker-compose is. I think I'd like to propose putting it in WordPress/openverse under a `monitoring` directory that would include the `docker-compose.yml` as well as documentation about how to configure monitors, our own best practices, etc. It doesn't make sense to me for us to just pick one of the three application repositories to put it in. The monitoring stack also fits in with the "meta"/"overview" nature of the WordPress/openverse repository.

Reviewer 2: Support this as well and hope that monorepo approval from the team, once that RFC lands, would make this even easier for folks to understand.

Aside from service configuration, however, there is also the issue of how to store our Prometheus query, alerting, and other configuations locally. Likewise we need to address that for Grafana dashboards. For example, we don't want to have to manually copy the configurations for our anomaly monitors from production. Even if we develop these monitors in a live staging environment (more on that in the section below on the monitor development workflow) we'll still want to store those in code to have them committed to production, rather than manually copying them to prod. As long as the code they're saved to is accessible to the local monitoring stack, we should be able to seed the local stack with the same base monitors and dashboards present in production.

### Local infrastructure recommendations

> One of the goals I'd like to achieve with the local infrastructure is to make it as easy as running `just monitor` and it spins up everything with tolerances for services that aren't currently running locally. For example, if someone is working primarily on developing frontend monitors, it would do no good for Prometheus to be producing errors about not be able to reach a local API, Airflow, image proxy, or Postgres instance. Same for someone working on the catalog, they should have to deal with answers about the frontend not being discoverable by Prometheus locally.

Reviewer 3: Totally agree. Do you think it would be a reasonable requirement to have folks run `just monitor` from the Wordpress/openverse repository?

Author: If they're working on monitoring yes.

Reviewer 5: Love this!

## DevEx

I've added some new `just` recipes in the example code in this PR.

Grafana configurations are stored as JSON so I think they'd be linted by prettier. They should be copy/paste exports anyway so we don't need to lint them for correctness or even style technically.

Prometheus configurations can be linted by `promtool` using this pre-commit repo: https://github.com/fortman/pre-commit-prometheus.

## Outstanding questions

### Authentication

Do we want to hide the metrics endpoint behind authentication? I don't really see why we would other than to stop spamming (but we could throttle those endpoints to match the prometheus scrape rate for example and it would prevent anyone from doing too much damage).

I like the idea of having fully open Prometheus and Grafana dashboards that don't require authentication to _explore_. Obviously we'd want to hide administration inside of authentication but each Prometheus and Grafana handle that on their own.

### Alerting

Do we want to use Prometheus for alerting or Grafana?

Pros for Prometheus:
- It is possible and potentially even trivial to provision alerts based on configuration files

> Cons for Prometheus:

Reviewer 3: Small formatting fix
```suggestion

Cons for Prometheus:
```

- It is much harder to configure and automatically provision changes to Prometheus's configuration
- The UI for building them does not exist so I'm not sure what the best way to write new rules is other than via yaml files which will be harder for folks to contribute to given we're not all full-time devops people with tons of time to learn how to do this without fiddling around with visual helper tools

Pros for Grafana:
- The UI for building them is nice

> Cons for Grafana:

Reviewer 3: Same as above
```suggestion

Cons for Grafana:
```

- There's no way to export or provision them so the only way to add rules is through the UI (there's no JSON version of the form either). Moving rules across environments would be hard... to be fair, developing rules with anything except production data is also very difficult (lots of guessing) so maybe this isn't a problem.

> I'd rather use Grafana provided we back up the database of alert configurations. If we do that then not having them in the code is hopefully less of a disaster.

Reviewer 3: Same, I'd much rather try to fiddle with this in the UI than do an iterative process _only for production_ where we have to edit config files.

Reviewer: Same for me as well.

### Updating configurations

#### Grafana

Grafana is configured to automatically detect new dashboards uploaded via JSON. It needs a restart to add new datasources and notification channels via the `provisioning` folder[^3].

There is currently no way to export or provision alerting rules.

#### Prometheus

Prometheus is configured via a single `prometheus.yml` file. I've created a Python script that generatese the appropriate `prometheus.{environment}.yml` file based on a `.conf` file using Python's `configparser` module. It's in the contents of this PR.

## Overview of proposed changes

* Use Docker to deploy the following services in production:
    * Prometheus
    * Grafana
    * GNU Mailman
* Rely on Prometheus primarily as a metrics aggregator and time series database. Do not use it for rule and alarm configuration.
* Rely on Grafana for visbility and alarming upstream from Prometheus.
* Create separate alarm streams per service in Mailman and aggregate all alarms into a Slack channel for extra visibility and redundancy.
* Use `django-prometheus` library to add the Prometheus `/metrics` endpoint to the API

> * Expose Grafana dashboards publicly _a la_ [Wikimedia](https://grafana.wikimedia.org/?orgId=1) and other FOSS projects

Reviewer 3: WOAH

## Appendix B: Alternative technologies

The following alternatives were considered before landing on Prometheus and Grafana.

### Graphite with Grafana

[Graphite](https://graphiteapp.org/) is very easy to put metrics into and integrates smoothly with Grafana. However, for every bit as easy as Graphite is to put metrics into, it is also that difficult to create queries against. Graphite does not hold your hand at all. It supports anomaly detection through [additional services](https://github.com/etsy/skyline), but they're not actively developed and configuring the anomaly detections requires relatively deep knowledge about statistics that I don't think our team is necessarily prepared to invest time into (nor do we have the existing knowledge here as far as I know).

Graphite is also older than Prometheus and while it works really well, there's a lot less current information about how to deploy and configure it. There's also almost no support for languages outside of the core langauges supported by the project including poor JavaScript support (which would make monitoring our Nuxt service more difficult).

> ### CloudWatch

Reviewer 3: I agree with all these points and would love to NOT use CloudWatch where possible :)

DataDog does have very good documentation and holds your hand a _lot_ when it comes to setting up monitors and dashboards. If I had to choose a hosted proprietary solution I'd go with DataDog over AWS. However, I would not choose it over hosted Prometheus and Grafana if given the choice.

### Solar Winds stack

Solar Winds also has their own [server and application monitoring tool](https://www.solarwinds.com/server-application-monitor/use-cases). It's meant to be easy to deploy and automatically configures itself for the services you have running. I don't have any experience with this other than having used it to monitor Tomcat services at a previous job. My impression is that it's targeted mostly at large enterprise and government contracts rather than projects like ours. The services themselves are also not free software, though the SDKs that integrate with them are. Likewise, it doesn't seem to be a very flexible offering; it would probably be difficult to integrate things like monitoring a Nuxt service.

### The ELK stack

> The final alternative is the [ELK stack](https://www.elastic.co/what-is/elk-stack). It's not exactly a 1:1 alternative to Prometheus and Grafana, though it could fulfill [some](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/xpack-ml-anomalies.html) of the [same](https://www.elastic.co/kibana/) use cases. This is a strong alternative that I hope reviewers of this RFC spend time considering. Read through Elastic's documentation about it and see if it could make sense for us. It could also be something that we implement down the road as a supplement to Prometheus and Grafana. Or it can replace it altogether.

Reviewer 3: I cannot say I have a ton of experience with the ELK stack, but what I remember wasn't too enjoyable. Kibana was difficult to grok and navigate. I remember our ops team at a previous job having lots of trouble setting it all up. That said, all of this is tertiary and I don't have any specific, data-backed resistance to it.

Author: I don't think Kibana's queries are all that much more cryptic than Prometheus, FWIW. Prometheus might be even more so, it's extremely syntax heavy whereas Kibana has a tendency to be pretty verbose.

# Monitoring across the stack

Note: Because I had to spend a good deal of time sketching out how this stuff works, I wrote a good deal of preliminary code. It's probably not perfect so it's really only a starting point, but it at least gives a vision for how we could do this.

## Reviewers

> - [ ] @zackkrida (Infrastructure sign off)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [x] @zackkrida (Infrastructure sign off)
```

> - [ ] Approver TBD (Catalog/API person)

Author: ```suggestion
- [x] @AetherUnbound
```

> - [ ] Approver TBD (API/Frontend person)

Author: ```suggestion
- [ ] @obulat 
```

As the production instances of the Openverse API start getting used for Jetpack and even WordPress core integrations soon and in the near future we will likely see a tremendous increase in traffic. Without visibility into our services we will be significantly hindered when debugging production performance and stability issues.

Without measuring _current_ performance, we can't make decisions about how to improve performance that aren't couched in anything better than educated guesses. This is not a situation we want to be in long term. We also have a sense that our services are reasonably speedy at the moment, but we don't know exactly how speedy or what kind of outliers exist. Sometimes we see the API slow down to over 2 seconds per-request. How often does that happen? Is it a 99th percentile or more like 60th (i.e., closer to the average experience).

## Purpose

> This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we use our existing Postgres instance for storing the gathered metrics.

Author: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes we introduce [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) to monitor our infrastructure. It also proposes that we create a new RDS Postgres instance for Grafana.
```

Grafana is a data visualization tool that supports building complex dashboards. It has the ability to integrate with nearly any source of data you could imagine, including our existing catalog and API databases. In the future we could use it to monitor cataloging progress over time for example. It's a tool good for many things in addition to visualizing metrics.

The Prometheus and Grafana services encompass the following key features that are important for maintaining the health and stability of our services:

* Metrics gathering
* Dashboard creation for making it quick and easy to understand the current state of our service health
* Anomaly detection and alarming so that if things get weird, we'll know about it as soon as possible

Additionally, both are free software. Prometheus is Apache 2 licensed and Grafana is AGPL-3.0. Both are actively developed in the open with heavy community involvement. They are also both widely deployed with lots of blog posts discussing configuration, use cases, and troubleshooting.

## Self-hosted vs. hosted

> We will seslf-host and use a new Postgres RDS instance for Grafana.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will self-host and use a new Postgres RDS instance for Grafana.
```

To simplify the hosting situation, let's try to deploy this using ECS from the beginning.

## What will we monitor

There are three key aspects of the application services I think we should monitor, along with a slew of system level metrics that we should monitor as well.

### System level metrics

* CPU
* RAM
* Storage
* Processes/threads

> These would be gathered from Airflow, API, Thumbnail proxy, Postgres and Nuxt. These metrics need to be retrieved from AWS. I _think_ that [this page describes how to do that](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/CloudWatch-Agent-PrometheusEC2.html) but AWS's language around this stuff is so cryptic to me I can't say with confidence it's the right documentation page for it.

Reviewer 2: I think this would work, yes. If we followed this approach, ee'd want to modify our existing user data scripts (the `init.tpl` files for each terraform service that define scripts to run when each instance is instantiated) to install the CloudWatch Agent with `sudo yum install amazon-cloudwatch-agent`. 

We'd then also need to attach a new policy (AWS-speak for some configuration that gives services access to each other) to each instance, a `CloudWatchAgentServerPolicy`. 

Alternatively, I'm seeing a lot of folks using a solution decoupled from AWS: Prometheus's [node_exporter](https://prometheus.io/docs/guides/node-exporter/). This is a static binary that works on any Linux server that exposes metrics over port 9100. I like what I'm reading about it.

Last note: our servers are _already using_ [Filebeat](https://www.elastic.co/beats/filebeat), which at one point was used to post logs to [graylog](https://www.graylog.org/). That's still installed on every instance and apparently _can_ work with Prometheus, although google searches on that really aren't clear.

Reviewer 2: Ah, forgive me, you mention the node_exporter later in the RFC.

> It would also be nice if we could integrate Cloudflare data into Grafana so that our visualizations are all in once place. Cache hits and other relevant information from Cloudflare would be excellent to monitor within our greater monitoring stack.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It would also be nice if we could integrate Cloudflare data into Grafana so that our visualizations are all in one place. Cache hits and other relevant information from Cloudflare would be excellent to monitor within our greater monitoring stack.
```

The most relevant for our usage are probably Slack, Webhook, and Email. Optionally we could incorporate PagerDuty depending on the team's tolerance and how we decide to organize expectations around responding to alerts.

My preference is for us to primarily rely on email and in particular to use email lists to allow individuals to subscribe/unsubscribe at will from alarm streams and provide an easy historical public record of alarms. We could use something like [GNU Mailman](https://list.org/) to [host this ourselves](https://github.com/maxking/docker-mailman) using FARGATE.

Email also makes it easy to compartmentalize alarms per category, it makes it easy for individuals to subscribe to specific streams of alarms by using different email prefixes per category. For example, each service could have its own mailing list.

We can also integrate Slack for good measure and have all alarms sent to the relevant channels via Slack incoming Webhook. It's very easy to configure the Slack integration.

The general purpose Webhook integration is useful for a future where we migrate away from Slack to Matrix (should that ever happen).

#### Runbooks

> Runbooks are the expected steps for addressing a particular alarm. As I mentioned elsewhere, alarms should be actionable. If they're not actionable then they're just noise and should be demoted to a warning until they're more accurate (less false positives). The _actions_ you take for any given alarm are directed by an alarm's accomanying runbook.

Author: ```suggestion
Runbooks are the expected steps for addressing a particular alarm. As I mentioned elsewhere, alarms should be actionable. If they're not actionable then they're just noise and should be demoted to a warning until they're more accurate (less false positives). The _actions_ you take for any given alarm are directed by an alarm's accompanying runbook.
```

### Grafana data sources

* Prometheus: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/prometheus/
* Elasticsearch: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/elasticsearch/
    * Note: not for visualizing system stats, those will come from Prometheus. This would be for querying the index. Totally optional.
* Postgres: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/postgres/
    * Just if we wanted to be able to visualize certain query results. Could eventually be relevant for general analytics.

## Configuration and infrastructure (local and cloud)

The discussion about Prometheus configuration and infrastructure go hand in hand, primarily because so much of the configuration needs to directly reference other pieces of infrastructure for the various integrations to work.

Prometheus works by scraping HTTP endpoints on services that provide a formatted set of metrics data. Essentially services don't need to worry about whether Prometheus is running or concern themselves with how long to wait between sending batched event lists. Each service just writes to a file (or some other storage) that is served to Prometheus over HTTP whenever it requests it.

> That has some really nice properties in that each service doesn't need to worry about what Prometheus is doing. We don't need to worry about it's tolerances for getting new events, rate limits, handling bad requests or timeouts if Prometheus is temporarily unavailable, anything like that. We (or rather the client librariy) just write and serve the metric data in the appropriate format and Prometheus handles the rest.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
That has some really nice properties in that each service doesn't need to worry about what Prometheus is doing. We don't need to worry about it's tolerances for getting new events, rate limits, handling bad requests or timeouts if Prometheus is temporarily unavailable, anything like that. We (or rather the client library) just write and serve the metric data in the appropriate format and Prometheus handles the rest.
```

    * This may require exercising the local service a bit to check that metrics appear as expected in the dashboards... can be difficult with small amounts of data though.
5. Deploy them to production via terraform or some other method to update the running Prometheus and Grafana instances with the latest configurations
    * Terraform has [providers for uploading dashboard configurations to  Grafana](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/grafana/grafana/latest)
    * With Prometheus, generate the new configuration file per environment using `just mkpromconf [environment]` and upload the configuration to the environment then restart Prometheus.

## DevEx

I've added some new `just` recipes in the example code in this PR.

Grafana configurations are stored as JSON so I think they'd be linted by prettier. They should be copy/paste exports anyway so we don't need to lint them for correctness or even style technically.

Prometheus configurations can be linted by `promtool` using this pre-commit repo: https://github.com/fortman/pre-commit-prometheus.

> 

Reviewer 2: Really appreciate these linting considerations!

### Alerting

Do we want to use Prometheus for alerting or Grafana?

Pros for Prometheus:
- It is possible and potentially even trivial to provision alerts based on configuration files

Cons for Prometheus:
- It is much harder to configure and automatically provision changes to Prometheus's configuration
- The UI for building them does not exist so I'm not sure what the best way to write new rules is other than via yaml files which will be harder for folks to contribute to given we're not all full-time devops people with tons of time to learn how to do this without fiddling around with visual helper tools

Pros for Grafana:
- The UI for building them is nice

Cons for Grafana:
- There's no way to export or provision them so the only way to add rules is through the UI (there's no JSON version of the form either). Moving rules across environments would be hard... to be fair, developing rules with anything except production data is also very difficult (lots of guessing) so maybe this isn't a problem.

I'd rather use Grafana provided we back up the database of alert configurations. If we do that then not having them in the code is hopefully less of a disaster.

> It is possible to export _all_ of them via the rules API: `http://grafana/api/ruler/grafana/api/v1/rules`. There's just no way to upload that JSON blob directly. We could scrape the endpoint and back it up into the code base for good measure and to further distribute the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```
We could scrape the endpoint and back it up into the code base for good measure and to further distribute the configuration.
```

Love it!

### Updating configurations

#### Grafana

Grafana is configured to automatically detect new dashboards uploaded via JSON. It needs a restart to add new datasources and notification channels via the `provisioning` folder[^3].

There is currently no way to export or provision alerting rules.

#### Prometheus

Prometheus is configured via a single `prometheus.yml` file. I've created a Python script that generatese the appropriate `prometheus.{environment}.yml` file based on a `.conf` file using Python's `configparser` module. It's in the contents of this PR.

## Overview of proposed changes

* Use ECS to deploy the following services in production:
    * Prometheus

>     * Grafana

Author: Note that Grafana is already deployed in our production infrastructure. I'm not sure if we'll replace or reuse the existing one. Probably whichever is less work (presumably reusing).

cc @zackkrida for final decision there.

Reviewer 2: The current service is so simple, we should just be able to update the grafana version and redepoy. That's what I recommend. We can look at switching to ECS later.

> * Use ECS to deploy the following services in production:
>     * Prometheus
>     * Grafana

Author: ```suggestion
* Use the existing Grafana instance in production
* Use ECS to deploy the following services in production:
    * Prometheus
```

* Airflow exporter: https://github.com/epoch8/airflow-exporter

### Grafana alerting integrations

Grafana has built in alerting since v4.0. It works upstream from provider alertmanagers, so if we wanted to consume alerting rules from Prometheus we could build rules in Prometheus and then consume them in Grafana and alert on them.

[Here is the list of Grafana "contact points" for alerting.](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/unified-alerting/contact-points/) A contact point is the notification channels that Grafana can send alerts to.

The most relevant for our usage are probably Slack, Webhook, and Email. Optionally we could incorporate PagerDuty depending on the team's tolerance and how we decide to organize expectations around responding to alerts.

My preference is for us to primarily rely on email and in particular to use email lists to allow individuals to subscribe/unsubscribe at will from alarm streams and provide an easy historical public record of alarms. We could use something like [GNU Mailman](https://list.org/) to [host this ourselves](https://github.com/maxking/docker-mailman) using FARGATE.

> Email also makes it easy to compartmentalize alarms per category, it makes it easy for individuals to subscribe to specific streams of alarms by using different email prefixes per category. For example, each service could have its own mailing list.

Reviewer: 💯 I'm sold! I think my preference would be email & Slack. +1 to all of this.

We can also integrate Slack for good measure and have all alarms sent to the relevant channels via Slack incoming Webhook. It's very easy to configure the Slack integration.

The general purpose Webhook integration is useful for a future where we migrate away from Slack to Matrix (should that ever happen).

#### Runbooks

Runbooks are the expected steps for addressing a particular alarm. As I mentioned elsewhere, alarms should be actionable. If they're not actionable then they're just noise and should be demoted to a warning until they're more accurate (less false positives). The _actions_ you take for any given alarm are directed by an alarm's accomanying runbook.

All alarms should have a relevant runbook linked in the alarm body. Ideally these would just be flat Markdown files but it'd be best if they could be hosted in the Openverse handbook on WordPress.org as well for redundancy and accessibility.

> 

Reviewer: +1 I'm glad you called this out in particular. This really exposes which alarms are meaningful and actionable. I'd add that it's also important for making it easier to distribute the work of _addressing_ alarms 💯

Reviewer 2: This section is fantastic.

    * Terraform has [providers for uploading dashboard configurations to  Grafana](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/grafana/grafana/latest)
    * With Prometheus, generate the new configuration file per environment using `just mkpromconf [environment]` and upload the configuration to the environment then restart Prometheus.

## DevEx

I've added some new `just` recipes in the example code in this PR.

Grafana configurations are stored as JSON so I think they'd be linted by prettier. They should be copy/paste exports anyway so we don't need to lint them for correctness or even style technically.

Prometheus configurations can be linted by `promtool` using this pre-commit repo: https://github.com/fortman/pre-commit-prometheus.

## Outstanding questions

### Authentication

Do we want to hide the metrics endpoint behind authentication? I don't really see why we would other than to stop spamming (but we could throttle those endpoints to match the prometheus scrape rate for example and it would prevent anyone from doing too much damage).

> I like the idea of having fully open Prometheus and Grafana dashboards that don't require authentication to _explore_. Obviously we'd want to hide administration inside of authentication but each Prometheus and Grafana handle that on their own.

Reviewer: +1, I think this would be very cool.

Reviewer 5: I would like to have open dashboards.
